---
title:  "Covid-19 diary 1"
date:   2020-03-22 12:30:00 +0000
categories: ["personal"]
---


There are many cataclysmic and apocalyptic events that I have considered
likely to occur in my lifetime. Nuclear war, climate change, and rising sea 
levels all seemed likely candidates; a novel viral pandemic was not high on my 
radar, even around the time of the 2014 ebola outbreak.



I became aware of the novel coronavirus that causes Covid-19 in late January
or early February 2020. At the time it seemed very similar to the SARS 
coronavirus outbreak of 2003 - very unpleasant and frightening that it had
taken hold in China, and likely to require urgent humanitarian intervention,
but also very remote and unlikely to affect my life significantly. Science 
twitter, as always, provided rapid and informative regular news updates on
what I assumed would be a short-lived but dangerous local outbreak. Two months
later, I struggle to remember what it felt like to think that way.

What's perhaps most difficult about this situation is the rate of change. I
had planned to visit my family in Ireland in early April for my nephew's naming
ceremony. Given the news I was seeing about the spread of the epidemic, around
March 10th I informed my family that it was looking somewhat unlikely that I 
would be able to travel back. At the time, I felt somewhat ridiculous in saying
this. There were about 300 cases in the UK, and only about 50 new cases every
day. Ireland had only 20 cases in total, with less than a handful of new cases
every day. My family said that it was unlikely to be a problem, but that we
would wait and see.

Under two weeks later, and that now seems like a different world. Now, France,
Spain, Ireland and several US states have been put in a state of partial 
lockdown. The idea of even taking the bus to the airport, frankly, scares me.
The idea of a holding a large family gathering including elderly relatives 
seems absurd. What's most strange to me is that that message, saying that 
perhaps I may not be able to travel in a month's time, seems as though it was 
made a lifetime ago, not ten days ago. I am left considering the age of my 
relatives, colleagues, and friends, and the reported hospitalisation and case 
fatality rates, and wondering how many of them I will never see again if 
Covid-19 becomes endemic in our populations.

Now, I believe, we are rapidly approaching crisis point in the UK. People are 
being advised to work from home, to avoid unnecessary travel and social contact,
and many people, just as in Italy before us, are not heeding this advice. 
I can only hope the results are different here.
Personally, it seems that every tickle in the throat or hot flush becomes a 
panic and potential self-quarantine. I and the vast majority of my colleagues 
are now working from home. In fact, I know of only one principal investigator 
in my institute who is still advising their students to continue working. I
intend to make fully known what I think of this advice in time.

The most immediate effect of social distancing for me has been a drastic drop
in my mood. Despite being a fairly introverted person, it is still important
to me to meet, discuss things, and laugh with friends and colleagues. 
I was pleased
[to discover](https://twitter.com/Amandatron89/status/1240041720403890179)
that I am not alone in finding it difficult to concentrate in times like these,
given the isolation and the increasingly bleak news.
I thought that it would be productive to write about this pandemic as it 
unfolds, as a diary for myself and a way to explore and clarify my thoughts.

Sadly I was not wise enough to stock up on toilet paper given my 
relatively advanced knowledge. I am left hoping that the great shortages will
be over in a few weeks when my supply runs out.
At least, as a vegetarian, I am never left without
a huge quantity of dried pulses and grains; I will survive, though I am left
with a pitiful supply of ginger due to a newfound public interest in healthy 
eating.
